[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For Gavriel,
time is running out.
His muscles are getting
weaker and weaker.
His legs have already given out.
At some point, his heart
and respiratory muscles
will follow suit.
But suddenly there's
hope for Gavriel.
Geneticists have developed a
new technique called CRISPR.
It's like a pair of scissors
that can edit genetic material
with great precision.
It holds out the prospect
of completely new therapies,
not just for rare
genetic diseases,
but also for cancer,
HIV infections,
and many other disorders.
The elevator in the
living room makes
daily life easier for Gavriel.
But he knows that his life is
dependent on medical progress.
>> CRISPR is going to change
and probably even revolutionize
the way how we are going to
practice medicine one day.
>> And not only medicine--
the CRISPR technique
can also give plants
new characteristics,
resistance to pests or drought.
Even some organic farmers see
opportunities in genome editing
and say they should
be exploited.
Critics though are
warning about a new era
of genetic engineering
because gene editing makes
possible previously unthinkable
interventions into the genome.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It's certainly going
to change our society.
And that's why not just
scientists, but society itself
must address the whole
issue of genome editing.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> How far should medicine be
allowed to go, and agriculture?
What are the opportunities
and risks behind CRISPR?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Gavriel lives in London.
He's mad about horses.
He spends every free minute
at the riding stables.
>> Well, I ride because
obviously I can't run around.
It gives me my legs back.
So when the horse is
running, I'm running as well.
And it gives me
that peace of mind
that it makes me
normal for once.
>> Gavriel knows what
it's like to be normal.
As a young boy, he could
walk just like his siblings.
>> Bye-bye.
>> [GASPS]
>> Hello.
>> Hi.
>> She likes that-- look.
>> But at some point it
became clear that something
wasn't right.
He was four when his
parents got the diagnosis--
Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Roughly one in 5,000 boys
is born with the disease.
>> Well at the time we
were given the diagnosis,
told very pragmatically your son
would lose the ability to walk
around 11 and then
die in his early 20's.
And there was nothing
that could be done.
And we left the office
with that knowledge.
>> The prognosis proved correct.
Despite all the efforts
he made, Gavriel gradually
lost the ability to walk.
At 13, he got his
first wheelchair.
>> It's ridiculous why
should someone like me have
to struggle unnecessarily.
But I'm practically right
at the beginning of my life.
So sometimes I see it as
like a 90-year-old man
in a 15-year-old's body.
>> Gavriel takes a lot
of medicines every day.
But they don't hold out a cure--
they can just delay the
progress of the disease.
It's about gaining time.
>> Every week that passes,
every day that passes,
I see the difficulty of lifting
a glass of juice to drink,
brushing his teeth.
The difference of the
child I'm caring for now
and the child I could be
caring for in six months time
is drastic.
And that is why
that pressing need
to do something sooner rather
than later is overriding.
>> Gavriel's parents have read
everything there is to know
about Duchenne.
It's not that much because the
pharmaceutical industry is not
particularly interested
in such rare diseases.
The Rosenfelds took
action themselves.
They set up a foundation,
invested their own money,
collected donations,
and established contact
with scientists
around the globe,
including Ronald
Cohn, pediatrician
in chief at the renowned
SickKids Hospital in Toronto.
Cohn is one of the
world's few experts
in rare muscle diseases.
His research involves the
development of new therapies.
And for the first
time in the history
of Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
there are prospects of a cure.
Ronnie, as everyone calls
him, is both a scientist
and a pediatrician.
Nowadays, his research work
doesn't leave him too much time
for patients.
But he still looks after
serious cases himself.
>> Your blood
pressure is just fine.
Did it hurt?
>> No it didn't.
>> I think that's
the best thing.
>> Ronnie knows how to
allay children's fears.
For over 10 years, he's
also been following
Gavriel's development.
Over time, the contact
has grown closer.
The Rosenfeld's and Ronald
Cohn have become friends.
[CELLPHONE RINGING]
In the meantime, Cohn supports
the Rosenfeld's foundation
as a scientific consultant.
[TELEPHONE RINGING]
>> Hello?
>> Ah, there we go.
Can you see us?
>> Can you see me?
>> Yes, yes.
>> This time it's not
about medical matters.
Gavriel wants to talk about
his forthcoming holiday.
>> Gavriel, tell me, what
are you going to do at camp?
>> Probably, I mean,
swimming, speedboat.
>> Speedboat?
All right.
>> He's already excited.
>> Ronnie is more to
Gavriel than just a friend.
He is the doctor who
could save his life.
>> Lots of love, eh.
>> Bye.
[KISSES]
>> [KISSES]
>> Ronald Cohn is
originally from Germany.
He's been working in the US
and Canada for over 20 years.
For a long time, the
investigation of muscle disease
produced no breakthroughs.
Then a scientific discovery made
Cohn sit up and take notice--
CRISPR gene editing.
It offered the prospect of
tackling the muscle weakness
directly in the patient's
cells, a therapeutic concept
for many other diseases as well
so far considered incurable.
>> We are for the first time
able to develop the concept
of fixing genetic mutations,
genetic abnormalities.
It's possible we
can think about it.
And that's why I think
it's one of the most
important discoveries
of the last few years.
>> This woman helped spark
the revolution in the genetic
laboratory.
Emmanuelle Charpentier.
Her discovery of the CRISPR
gene editing process in 2012
has earned the French
scientist countless awards.
She now heads the Max Planck
Institute for Infection biology
in Berlin.
Here, Emmanuelle
Charpentier continues
to work with the
bacteria to which she
owes her scientific career.
In bacteria which
caused scarlet fever,
she discovered a mechanism
with which the bacteria protect
themselves against
viruses, a molecule
that functions like
scissors and can cut
genetic material precisely--
CRISPR.
Charpentier had the idea
of using this molecule
to create a universally
usable tool.
>> What is the most fascinating
is to have had the privilege
to identify a mechanism that
is working in so neat fashion
in nature.
And that was obvious
to be able to harness
as a powerful technology.
And it shows really the
power of evolution in life.
>> Our genome is rather
like the book of life,
an incredibly long text
with billions of letters.
But sometimes you get typos--
mutations.
And they can lead to diseases.
This is where CRISPR comes in.
The molecule works like a pair
of scissors with an address
label.
It looks for a specific
text, locks on, and cuts
out the typo, or
alters the text,
or inserts something else, more
easily and precisely than ever
before.
>> It's an easy,
programmable system.
It's more efficient.
And it's also more versatile.
So one can perform
different types
of changes on the genomes.
So for the biologists, this is
really a very powerful tool.
It's like a Swiss army knife.
>> Geneticists around the world
are exploring the possibilities
of the new tool.
CRISPR works with plants,
animals, and humans,
and so could fundamentally
change agriculture as well as
medicine.
For Gavriel and for
many other children
with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy,
CRISPR could be the
salvation because the cause
of their illness
lies in the genes.
Gavriel's parents
do everything they
can to make his life easier.
They're hopeful and,
at the same time,
anxious about the potential of
the new gene editing technique.
For the first time
since the diagnosis,
there is something
approaching hope,
a vague prospect of a cure.
>> Science and technology
has moved at a pace that is
unprecedented.
And things that used
to take two years
can now be done in six months.
So the progress has
been incredible.
I'm slowly getting to
a very uneasy point
where actually this could
impact my own child.
>> For Ronald Cohn too, a
treatment for Gavriel is moving
within reach.
In Toronto, he's
conducting research
into Gavriel's muscle cells.
The muscle weakness is
caused by a gene which
contains the blueprint
for dystrophin,
a protein that normally
stabilizes the muscles.
The problem is that
the dystrophin gene is
the longest in the human body.
It's made up of two and 1/2
million individual letters.
Two and 1/2 million letters
have lots of room for typos.
Gavriel's mutation is
relatively simple--
a certain DNA section occurs
doubled, occurs doubled.
Cohn has programmed
the gene scissors
to cut out this precise section.
>> We put the CRISPR Cas9
into the cell culture,
waited about 12 days, I think.
And there it was.
And that was one of
these Eureka moments.
>> An initial success.
But a cell culture is
a very different thing
from a human being.
How would Gabrielle's
already damaged muscles
react to the treatment?
Even the nature of the therapy
is still completely undefined.
The difficulty is getting
the CRISPR genetic scissors
to the right spot.
Would an injection into
the bloodstream the best?
Or directly into the muscles?
And above all, what side
effects might Gavriel face?
All this is totally unknown.
>> If I have a boy who
already sits in a wheelchair,
and I know he sits in a
wheelchair because he already
has a lot of muscle tissue
replaced by scar and fat
tissue, is there still enough
muscle left that any kind
of therapy that could target
the muscle would be successful
enough to at least keep the
boy at the stage where he is
and not have him
progress any further?
And I'll be honest, the
answer to this question
will only come from
clinical trials.
>> Jesse Gelsinger was a boy
too when the latest findings
of the geneticists gave him
reason for hope 20 years ago.
The fate of the
18-year-old American
shows that we must be wary
of expecting too much.
In 1999, Jesse was one
of the first patients
to be treated with a
pioneering gene therapy.
He was given an infusion of
genetically-altered virus
particles in a bid to cure
his metabolic disease.
But his immune system collapsed.
Four days later, Jesse
Gelsinger died, a supposedly
unforeseeable accident.
It only emerged later the
same complications had
occurred in animal experiments.
But no one had drawn the
necessary conclusions in time.
Jesse's death put a stop to
the development of gene therapy
for many years.
Ronald Cohn knows exactly
what happened back then.
And he's determined not
to repeat the mistake.
>> If something even close
to what happened 20 years ago
to gene therapy is going
to happen to CRISPR,
it will again paralyze
the field for years.
And nobody wants to
go down that path.
>> When is the right
moment to risk a therapy?
Not before all risks
have been investigated?
But won't that be
too late for Gavriel?
For Gavriel's doctors,
it's safety first.
But his condition deteriorates
with every day that passes.
And lost muscle tissue
cannot be replaced.
>> So these are very
crazy scenarios to be in.
To do nothing isn't
really an option.
And do something comes with
a whole load of excitement
and complete fear.
>> Gavriel's life is not
immediately threatened.
He has a lot of
things he enjoys.
Would he go along with a
potentially risky gene therapy
experiment?
>> I would because I'm desperate
to be normal like my friends,
to be able to just walk out the
house as opposed to you know.
I like to go for a
run with my friends.
I like to play football
properly with my friends,
not in my wheel chair
because I don't like being
the goalkeeper or the referee.
I've seen my friends
are trying to be nice,
but that's not how I see it.
>> But the debate about the
opportunities and the risks
of CRISPR in medical research is
broader than whether individual
patients like Gavriel
could be helped.
While we are filming
in London, we
hear about completely
different experiments
involving genome editing.
In the US, scientists have
changed the genetic material
of human embryos.
And that's a totally
different dimension.
Because when researchers
manipulate these early stages
of human life, the
changes will be
passed on to all
subsequent descendants.
Mankind is altering
its own germline--
the bond between
the generations.
The researchers in
the US were trying
to find a cure for a
hereditary heart disease.
These experiments took place
only in the cell culture,
but they split the
scientific community apart.
Emmanuelle Charpentier knows the
power of the CRISPR mechanism
she helped to discover.
And she rejects any intervention
in the human germline.
>> It's an ethical issue.
This is to protect issues
of human integrity,
to not cross certain barriers.
And there's always the idea that
the CRISPR Cas9 technologies
would adhere to for
therapeutic purposes
and for research and
development purposes
and to treat patients,
not to treat germlines.
>> In Germany, such research
on embryos is prohibited
by particularly stringent laws.
But in the US, in China,
and in other countries,
scientists are continuing
with these experiments.
It seems it's no longer a
question of whether or not
a CRISPR baby will be born, but
when and where it will be born.
In the Berlin Museum of
Medical History at the Charite
Hospital, we meet Peter Dabrock
He is a theologian and head
of the German Ethics Council.
CRISPR has made so much
achievable that in the past
was very difficult
or simply impossible.
So the ethical questions
raised are all the more urgent.
What should mankind be
allowed to do and what not?
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> It's an issue for
the whole of mankind.
So it can't just be addressed
by scientists alone.
It cannot and must not be the
case that scientists alone
establish realities.
We need instead a broad
global discussion.
>> CRISPR is capable not
just of treating disease.
With it, genetic research could
focus on blue eyes, blond hair,
everything that
lies in our genes.
Since the advent of
genetic engineering,
there's been talk
of designer babies.
That could now become a reality.
Who wouldn't want healthier,
more intelligent offspring?
>> Do I think that
parents would want this?
Do I think that human
beings would want it?
Absolutely.
Which is why you need to
regulate this somehow.
You need to regulate the
technology and the way
that you continue to enable
innovation and progress,
but at the same
time limit people
from doing things we
don't want them to do.
>> But how can you limit people
in widely different countries
and cultures from tampering
with the human genome?
From intervening
in human evolution?
Thanks to CRISPR,
these questions
will be with us for
a long time to come.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I do believe that our
children's world will be
a CRISPR world.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> And that genome editing scene
will shape all life science,
medical, agricultural,
and technical developments
to the extent that the technical
world we know will be turned
upside down.
>> While the medical sphere
wrestles with the limits
of the possible, in agriculture
the gene-editing technique has
already begun to
change the world,
especially in the United States.
Johnston, Iowa, is
the headquarters
of DuPont Pioneer, the biggest
agrarian multinational.
We are among the
first television crews
to be allowed to film here.
The research focus
here is above all
on the corn genome,
also called maize.
Every corn plant in the test
greenhouses carries a barcode
and is fed completely
automatically.
The big question here is which
genes are responsible for which
characteristics.
As soon as the
company knows that,
it will be able to
produce targeted changes
in the genome of the
plants to improve
their resistance to pests, for
example, or to raise yields.
Since the CRISPR
gene-editing technique
was discovered in 2012,
plant breeding at Pioneer
has also become faster
and less expensive.
The company sees huge
business opportunities.
>> For me, this is the
realization of 30-plus years
of hope and dreams for how we
could improve the food supply.
So we already are
building a pipeline
of product opportunities
that will improve, as I said,
sustainability, water
use, disease resistance.
And as I said, we're also
working in a number of crops.
So I think the next decade
will be a very exciting time.
>> Pioneer is not alone.
Many other companies
and universities
are already using
CRISPR to produce plants
with new characteristics.
Laboratories have
already created mushrooms
that last longer, soya beans
with a healthier fatty acid
composition, wheat that's
resistant to certain pathogens,
and potatoes that
produce less carcinogenic
acrylamide when fried.
Pioneer also granted us
access to a trial field
where the first CRISPR
plants are growing,
a release experiment
that at the moment
would be unthinkable in Germany.
The plants are waxy corn,
which has a special starch
composition.
Nothing revolutionary in
itself because it already
existed before CRISPR.
But waxy corn will be the
first CRISPR product worldwide
to come onto the market.
>> You'd see it a
little bit in food.
You'd see it in industrial uses.
In fact, if you have paper
that's a shiny surface paper,
that's probably using
a specialty starch
from our waxy corn.
The yield, the performance
of this product,
will be superior to our current
versions of waxy product.
And it's because we
can just go in and make
the targeted changes directly
in our best varieties,
we can actually deliver
really, really good performing
varieties to our customers.
>> The research director
is enthusiastic.
But the CRISPR corn is also
raising old misgivings.
Once again, it's
the major companies
that are driving genetic
engineering forward.
When the first genetically
engineered plants
were developed in
the 1990s, companies
like Pioneer and
Monsanto promised
they would produce
plants that will
be good for the environment
and healthier for consumers.
So far, these plants
have failed to appear.
Instead, genetic
engineering has helped
to accelerate the
industrialization
of agriculture.
Monocultures and the use of
pesticides are on the increase.
Around 80% of all
genetically modified plants
today are resistant
to a herbicide.
The seed companies sell
sprays against weeds,
along with the seeds,
a lucrative business.
And that's what's
sparking protest.
Monsanto and genetic
engineering have
become bywords for all evils.
Campaigns have led to public
opinion largely rejecting
what's known as green
genetic engineering.
The demonstrators are
protesting, above all,
against the power of the
major companies in the US,
as well as in Europe.
[PROTESTERS SHOUTING]
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> That's a huge problem,
especially in so-called Third
World countries.
I know of countries where,
for example, farmers no longer
have the choice of not buying
Monsanto cotton or Monsanto
seeds.
From that moment on,
because seed, after all,
is the starting
point of production,
they're dependent on a few
globally operating companies.
As farmers, we can't
be neutral to that.
And as consumers, we shouldn't
be neutral to that either.
>> So far, genetic engineering
has principally been employed
where it pays--
for soybeans and corn,
rapeseed, and cotton,
the so-called cash crops
that earn companies billions.
Are the new CRISPR plants also
mainly strengthening the power
of the multinationals?
The distrust they're
facing is certainly great.
Prince Felix zu
Lowenstein is the chairman
of Germany's Association
of Organic Food Producers.
He represents a totally
different approach
to agriculture, which rejects
any targeted intervention
in the genetic
material of plants.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I believe that the
tunnel vision concentration
on the genome is wrong.
We must look at the
agro-ecosystem as a whole.
Instead of trying to repair
the system so that we
can keep it going with all other
negative effects, for example,
on biodiversity,
we would do better
to change the system
itself by looking
at mixed crops for example
and the development of soil
fertility.
That would take us
very much nearer
to solving the
problems that we're now
trying to solve in the genome.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> But are in fact a more
sustainable agriculture
and CRISPR gene editing
really mutually exclusive?
Is CRISPR simply
a new instrument
in the hands of
the multinationals?
At the University of
California in Davis,
we meet an unusual couple.
Pamela Ronald is a
plant geneticist.
Her husband, Raoul Adamchak
is an organic farmer.
UC Davis is one of the
world's leading agricultural
universities.
Organic farming and
genetic engineering--
conflicting fields
you might think.
But they needn't be if
they pursue the same aims.
>> We both have a vision, a very
similar vision for sustainable
agriculture and
how the healthiest,
most productive food
can be grown in the most
environmentally friendly way.
So there's a definite
overlap there.
>> On the university farm Raoul
cultivates beans and other
vegetables without using
chemical fertilizers
or pesticides.
But some problems
are persistent.
Again and again, pests
destroy his crops.
Raoul is one of the few
organic farmers prepared
to talk in public about how new
plants from the gene laboratory
could help.
>> Agriculture needs to use
most advanced technologies along
with the best ecological
farming practices.
If we can use both our plant
breeding brains and our farming
practice brains to put together
a more diverse and more
productive agriculture, I think
that bodes well for the future.
>> Pamela Ronald is a geneticist
and has specialized in rice,
one of the most important
food crops in the world.
The multinationals are not
very interested in genetically
modified rice.
They can't make
much money from it
because it's mainly
grown and eaten
in poor regions of the world.
>> What I became drawn to
working on agriculture is
to help contribute to an
ecologically based system
of farming and to help nourish
people that don't have much
to eat.
So there are many people
that lack food security.
So those were my major reasons.
>> She's had great scientific
success using previous genetic
engineering methods.
But the work on a new plant
variety was immensely expensive
and took decades.
So recently, Pamela
Ronald and her colleagues
have also been concentrating
on CRISPR genome editing.
The researchers hope it will
help them reach their goal more
quickly and will make
varieties possible that
were previously unimaginable.
They aim to develop varieties
that certain pests can't
damage.
That would protect crops
and save on pesticides.
In addition, they want
to modify rice plants
to make them better able to
cope with climate change.
>> Doing well.
Look at this DNA pattern.
>> A dream would be that
we could use this approach
to develop drought-tolerant rice
that could also be applicable
to other crops.
That's a big challenge
in plant biology
right now, especially in the
face of the changing climate
is to develop crops that are
more resilient to climate
change.
>> Her husband is also looking
to the CRISPR technique
for help.
The many discussions
with his wife
have rendered the organic
farmer open to something new.
A root pest is eating his
vegetables, especially
the squash.
>> I mean, there's
just nothing there.
>> Yeah.
>> And that should be
a well-rooted plant.
>> But then look, they want
you to pick up the root.
>> If the squash grow at
all, they're very small.
But there are some
plants that have
resisted the pest attacks well.
>> So if we can find a crop,
identify the resistance
in another crop, then you could
put the gene into this crop.
That might work.
>> Or you saw how the plant
didn't produce a lot of roots.
Well, maybe you
could find some genes
that would double or
triple or quadruple
the amount of roots produced.
And the plant could just outgrow
this [? infantileness ?]..
>> The two of them want to
launch a research project
on this pest because organic
agriculture has no means
of combating it.
The toxic substances used
in conventional agriculture
are taboo for Raoul.
He sees a plant from
the CRISPR laboratory
as the best solution.
>> I would plant it.
But the big caveat is would the
USDA National Organic Program
allow me to plant it.
So if they can accept
CRISPER-mediated plants,
then I would plant it.
It's a no-brainer.
>> What's so obvious to
Raoul is highly incendiary.
Opposition to
genetic engineering
is a central pillar
of organic farming.
We asked Prince
Felix zu Lowenstein
whether the new CRISPR
technique could change that.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> These new genetic techniques
we're talking about share
at least one risk with the
old genetic techniques--
they involve replicable
living organisms,
which we are releasing into
nature from where we can never
extract them again.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> True.
But hasn't traditional
plant breeding
been doing the same thing
for thousands of years?
It's not only the
CRISPR corn growing
in the trial field
in Iowa that's
radically different from the
original natural corn plant.
Most corn varieties
were developed
without genetic engineering.
Through repeated cross
breeding, they're
now far removed from
the original wild plant,
which is also here.
Teosinte is the name of the
wild distant ancestor of corn.
The kernels are tiny.
It's still found in Mexico
and neighboring countries.
Through crossing
and selection, corn
has radically changed in the
course of thousands of years.
And the genome of the plant
has been modified completely
without genetic engineering.
So is genetic
engineering nothing
other than a form
of plant breeding?
Well, not quite.
Because at least with
genetic engineering to date,
man has gone one step further.
To genetically modify
corn or other plants,
researchers generally
use bacteria
which contain the desired gene.
The foreign gene is implanted
into the genome of the corn.
A plant modified like
this is called a transgene
because it contains
DNA transferred
from other organisms.
CRISPR does away with this.
The genetic scissors can
alter the plant's genome
without introducing foreign DNA.
The editing mechanism itself
is then completely removed.
The resulting corn
plant therefore
contains nothing but corn DNA.
If CRISPR is used
like this, the result
is indistinguishable
from a natural mutation.
And genetic engineering,
which can't be detected,
is not genetic engineering,
according to the US authorities
ruling on Pioneer's waxy corn.
>> It's not being regulated
under their biotech framework.
And it's being
regulated or reviewed
as a conventionally-bred
variety.
And so it won't be under
a GMO rubric, if you will.
>> A decision with far
reaching consequences.
These plants will soon be
growing in many fields,
in the US at first.
Whether European
farmers will be allowed
to cultivate plants
modified in the same way
depends on how the EU
classifies CRISPR plants.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> If genome editing and its use
in agriculture are registered
on the side of classic
genetic engineering,
then the use of CRISPR
in agriculture is dead.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Or, will the public
accept that we really do have
a veritable alternative here?
That is precisely not a GMO, a
genetically modified organism.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> This is the crucial
decision that divides us,
that is being fought out
vehemently, right now,
both in Germany and in Europe.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> In the whole of
Germany at the moment,
there are no genetically
modified plants growing
in the fields.
Will CRISPR change that?
As yet no one knows.
And this uncertainty
is a problem
for European plant breeders.
We are visiting
Heinrich Bohm, who
breeds potatoes near Lunneborg.
No agro-multinational this, but
a medium-sized German company.
It was his grandparents
who began potato breeding
over 100 years ago.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Yes, these potatoes
look very good.
>> Heinrich Bohm is not
opposed to the new gene editing
technique in plant breeding.
You would actually
like to use CRISPR.
He sees it as an opportunity
for combating pests and plant
diseases.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> One that gives us a lot
of trouble is late blight,
Phytophthora.
It was actually the reason for
the start of potato breeding
in the 19th century.
>> To this day, nobody has
really managed to control this
disease, except with huge
amounts of pesticides.
In Heinrich Bohm's
greenhouses, all the work
is still done by hand.
Different potato
plants are pollinated
in a bid to breed
a variety that's
not susceptible to late blight.
Perhaps the answer
lies in wild potatoes.
They're tiny, but
certain genes make
them resistant to late blight.
Using CRISPR, he could combine
the best characteristics
of wild and more
modern varieties.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I believe that with
these new techniques,
we could cut the time it takes
to introduce a resistance gene
from wild potatoes into
cultivated potatoes to about
a quarter.
It would mean we could
introduce various resistance
genes at the same time.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> I imagine that chemical
plant's protection would then
be significantly produced.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> This sort of plant
would therefore contribute
to environmental protection.
But so far Heinrich
Bohm is not allowed
to use the new technique.
All the seedlings here
have been produced
in the conventional way,
which takes up to 15 years
to cultivate a new variety.
Heinrich Bohm has already
set up a new laboratory
for gene editing.
He doesn't want to fall behind
the competition in the US.
But work hasn't
yet started here.
Bohm is waiting for
the classification
of the new CRISPR technique
by the EU and Germany's
federal government--
as conventional plant breeding
or as genetic engineering.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> If it's comparable with
the usual rules for genetic
engineering, then it will be
a technique very likely beyond
our financial means.
We won't manage it.
So we'll be out of the running.
>> The problem for Heinrich Bohm
is that it takes years to get
a license, according to
genetic engineering law.
It's time consuming and
too expensive for breeders
like him.
Then there'd be the hassle with
genetic engineering opponents.
Though ironically,
one organic farmer
believes that their
concerns have actually
created some of the problems.
>> In a way, the resistance to
genetically engineered crops
and other regulatory steps that
have been imposed have played
into the hands of these large
companies because now only
the large companies can afford
to develop new genetically
engineered crops.
>> Normally, organic cultivation
and industrial farming are
mutually hostile.
At the same time, the
problems are growing.
The global population
is increasing.
Biodiversity is
declining dramatically.
Agriculture has to
come up with something.
What we've seen in Davis could
chart a path for the future.
Raoul and his wife Pamela want
to find solutions that combine
the best of both worlds.
For them, CRISPR is
a tool to this end,
nothing more and nothing less.
>> There's a lot of discussion
of crop genetic improvement.
Obviously, it's very important.
All farmers rely on crops
that are genetically improved
in some manner.
But that's just one
part of farming.
We also need ecologically-based
farming practices
and stable government policies.
So it's not only about
genes in our food.
And I think sometimes
people forget that.
So a sustainable
agriculture includes
many different practices.
>> What role can CRISPR
play and, above all,
be allowed to play in solving
the problems in agriculture
and in medicine?
In Southern Germany, researchers
at the University Hospital
of Freiburg are pursuing
an ambitious goal--
finding a cure for the immune
deficiency caused by HIV.
Geneticist Toni
Cathomen and his team
are testing whether
the new genome
editing technique functions with
precision in the laboratory.
Only then can the first
patients be treated.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> What we are currently
developing in the laboratory is
a therapy for
actually curing HIV.
Compared with the
medicinal treatment,
which has to be
continued lifelong,
our therapeutic approach would
offer a one-off treatment
by which the HIV infection
would be vanquished.
And the patient could
be discharged, cured.
>> A dream for
many HIV patients.
Also because a certain stigma
still attaches to the disease.
Dr. Susanne Usadel
is working closely
with the scientists at
the University Hospital.
HIV as her specialist field.
For over 30 years, she's been
treating patients suffering
from the immune deficiency.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> In the 1980s
as a young doctor,
I attended people who were dying
and we knew only that it was
a blood-borne illness and
probably a viral disease.
>> Since then, the therapeutic
possibilities have developed
rapidly.
With the medication available
today, many patients
can lead a virtually
normal life.
The disease itself, AIDS,
no longer breaks out,
even though the patients still
carry the virus within them.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> This means that nowadays
life is possible with HIV
for a virus carrier.
Now comes the cure.
A lot of patients think Dr.
Usadel will give me a tablet
and that will be the last
tablet I'll ever take,
and then I'm cured.
>> But it's not quite so easy,
even when everything goes well.
In the laboratory,
the scientists
are working on human
cells to prevent viruses
from entering them.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> Every virus needs certain
doors in order to enter
the cells.
What we're now going
to do with gene editing
is to close these doors forever.
The virus can't
get into the cell,
which makes the whole immune
system resistant to the virus.
>> In the laboratory,
this already works.
The researchers
switch off a receptor
on the surface of the cell,
which the HI virus needs.
They have to ensure that
the genetic scissors change
the genome only at
the desired points.
Any miss cut in a cell could
have dramatic consequences
for the patient.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> We're able to show that
after gene editing about 80%
of the cells we've genetically
modified are resistant
to the HI virus.
What's important is that we'd
see practically no miss cuts.
So the precision of gene
editing is extremely high.
>> What works in the laboratory
is soon to be tried out
in humans.
The patients first
have to undergo
a course of chemotherapy.
Their immune system is
to be partly closed down
to allow the cells
modified by gene editing
to spread throughout the body.
Only if this functions will
the patient be cured of HIV.
Together with the scientists
from the University Hospital
of Freiburg, Dr.
Susanne Usadel is
preparing the clinical trial.
At first, only HIV
patients will be
treated who have cancer, and
therefore need chemotherapy
in any case.
Despite the stressful
treatment, many HIV patients
have already volunteered
to take part in the trial.
Also because they suffer from
the image of their disease.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> If someone has a lymphoma
disease, their granny will go,
oh my god, can I help you, can I
make you some soup and give you
a hug.
But if someone says
I'm HIV-positive--
have you been leading a
dodgy life, too many men,
are you gay?
Or if you're a woman, how many
men have you had in your life?
If only we could get to
where people would open up
their arms when you say
I'm HIV-positive and would
ask the same questions they
ask with any other disease.
That would be great.
>> [SPEAKING GERMAN]
>> HIV patients can now
live with their disease,
but the stigma is hard to bear.
For many, a cure is
their greatest wish.
But for the Rosenfeld
family in London,
everything depends
on a breakthrough
in genetic research--
and soon.
Time is the decisive
factor for Gavriel.
His muscle deficiency
is getting worse,
however much he
fights against it.
>> 75% of the battle
is won in your head.
If you think I'm going to
get weaker, you get weaker.
If you think I'm going to stay
strong, and you stay strong.
But obviously 25% is purely
what the doctors can do.
But most of the fight,
as I said, is in my head.
>> Sometimes he can hardly
cope with the situation.
But he has something that
helps him in these moments.
[PIANO MUSIC PLAYING]
His mother can't stop time,
but she tries her best
to cherish her memories.
[PIANO MUSIC PLAYING]
And she tries not
to think about how
Gavriel's condition
will develop if there's
no effective therapy.
>> Having him in a complete
state of paralysis would be
much more of a fear
for me than losing him.
Him having a great
quality of life
for a shorter period of
time, I can deal with.
But living for another 20
years completely unable
to brush your own teeth, blow
your nose, I can't go there.
So the risks I'm willing to take
now for the right technology
are high.
>> In the meantime, Ronald
Cohn has gone one step further.
He's telling students
about success
with animal experiments.
The scientists have bred a
genetically modified mouse
which also suffers from
hereditary muscular dystrophy,
not quite the same disease as
Gavriel's, but the symptoms
are similar.
The mouse was injected
with CRISPR molecules
into its bloodstream.
The result-- the mouse now moves
almost like a healthy animal.
>> That's the power--
>> One step further towards
a therapy for human beings.
But Ronald Cohn is still
a long way from his goal.
And time is running out for
him finally to help Gavriel.
>> I would lie to you that there
are not times where I wake up
at night and wonder,
whatever we are trying to do,
will it be too late for Gavriel.
It happens once in a while.
But in general, I try to keep
focused, keep looking forward.
And as long as we really
do everything we can,
then science and destiny will
come together at some point.
>> What Emmanuelle Charpentier
discovered is slowly but surely
changing the world.
New horizons have been
opened up by CRISPR.
And with them,
perhaps new risks.
But the crucial question
is not whether we
want to use the new
genome editing technique.
But for what?
What sort of
agriculture do we want?
What medical therapies?
And what contribution can and
should genetic engineering
make?
If we want to shape
the way things develop,
we have to address the issue.
And we have to do that now.
[MUSIC - THE BEATLES, "LET IT
BE"]
>> (SINGING) When I find
myself in times of trouble,
Mother Mary comes to me,
speaking words of wisdom,
let it be.
And in my hour of
darkness, she is
standing right in front of
me, whisper words of wisdom,
let it be.
Let it be, oh let it be.
Whisper words of
wisdom, let it be.